>> From demons and fairies
to UFOs and Bigfoot,
tales of the unexplained have
been a part of humanity's story
since the beginning.
Ancient alien theorists
will look at the Bible
and chalk up every
bizarre event to aliens
while a religious
scholar may look
at contemporary alien encounters
as manifestations of demons.
Bigfoot and other cryptids have
a strange habit of showing up
near UFO sightings.
And those who encounter
either of these phenomena
often discover newfound
psychic abilities.
Could there be a
common cause that
explains all paranormal events?
One of the most famous
sustained paranormal experiences
is the Mothman incident of 1966.
For 13 months, Point
Pleasant, West Virginia
was plagued with sightings
of a bizarre winged humanoid
accompanied by mysterious
lights in the sky, animal
mutilations, and other accounts
of paranormal activity.
Journalist John Keel
famously documented
this prolonged period of
unusual events in his book
"The Mothman Prophecies,"
which was later made
into a film of the same name.
These simultaneous events
were not new to Keel.
He often wrote of window
areas, specific locations
on our planet where paranormal
events were far more likely
and even expected to occur.
For experiencers and
believers of the paranormal,
the greatest frustration
often lies in the lack
of abundant physical evidence.
A few landing marks
here, a bit of fur
there, and even the
occasional photograph
don't seem to be enough
to convince the skeptics.
After decades of
researching such cases,
Keel developed an
elegant hypothesis
which explains the
troublesome disparity
between excessive testimony
and scarce physical evidence.
His book "The Eighth Tower,"
written at the same time
as "The Mothman
Prophecies," proposes
a sort of unified theory to
explain all paranormal events.
These entities are able
to shift up and down
the electromagnetic spectrum,
appearing and disappearing
as they please.
Keel called this
the superspectrum
And he referred to the
beings inhabiting it
as ultraterrestrials.
This could explain the variety
of electromagnetic effects
often associated with
paranormal events.
Cars stall, widespread
power outages
occur, radios and
telephones go crazy,
and battery operated
devices refuse to work.
Clocks and watches
have also been
known to stop in the presence
of UFOs, monsters, and ghosts.
Keel believes these beings
are native to the earth, which
explains their manifestation
in different forms
throughout the
ages, but that they
inhabit physical dimensions
beyond normal human perception.
This theory fits with
scientific understandings
of how our brains perceive
the world around us.
It is well known that our
senses are only equipped
to pick up a very small
slice of physical activity.
Dogs, cats, and other animals
are able to hear audio
frequencies we cannot.
Is it simply
coincidence that they
seem to have a sixth
sense for the paranormal?
Pet psychologist
Marti Miller has
said, "sensing the supernatural
is natural for dogs,
because they don't judge it.
People could see
auras or spirits,
but they either don't
believe they exist,
or think that, if they do
exist, we could not see them."
Furthermore, our sensory
organs are constantly
capturing far more information
than our brains can process.
One of the most
critical functions
of the brain's sensory response
is filtering out information
that it deems unnecessary.
Pattern recognition plays a
large role in this process.
When you see something
that looks like a tree,
your brain acknowledges
the general shape of a tree
and quickly creates
the idea of a tree.
But what happens when you
observe something that
fits no recognized pattern?
"What we pay attention
to is largely
determined by our expectations
of what should be present,"
said Christopher Chabris,
a cognitive psychologist,
in an interview with
the "New York Times."
"Without expecting
something, we're
unlikely to pay attention
to it," he says.
"And when we are not paying
attention to something,
we are surprisingly
likely to not see it."
This could also explain
the common motif described
by Keel and many
other researchers
that when you start
studying these phenomena,
they begin to reflect back,
occurring with more regularity
and even responding
to your thoughts.
It seems that once your
brain recognizes these beings
and begins paying
attention to them,
your odds of glimpsing
them improve.
In the 1960s, writer
Gustav Davidson
was compiling a massive book
of historical accounts called
"Dictionary of Angels."
Davidson had never had a
paranormal experience before.
But during his writing, he was
literally bedeviled by angels.
Participants in the
growing CE-5 movement
go one step further,
intentionally working
to summon this sort of contact.
A close encounter
of the fifth kind
refers to an experience
in which someone interacts
in a purposeful way with
an unidentified flying
object or its inhabitants.
Some ufologists, most
notably Dr. Steven Greer,
have developed protocols
for intentionally initiating
contact, believing that a
focused meditation can promote
interaction with nearby beings.
Practitioners claim a
surprising level of success
with these protocols, producing
all manner of documentation
showing strange lights
and other manifestations
during CE-5 meditations.
Could it be that
we are constantly
surrounded by these
ultraterrestrials
and our focused
attention is all that
is necessary to perceive them?
Of course, there
is the possibility
that the existence of paranormal
entities throughout history
could be chalked
up to Jung's theory
of the collective
unconscious revealing itself
through vividly
overactive imaginations,
or could we be living
on a densely populated,
multidimensional
planet alongside beings
who have interacted with
us for centuries, leaving
little trace within our own
narrow perception of reality?